Add 10.9.0 Studio Pro release notes (#7469)
mendix/docs: content/en/docs/releasenotes/studio-pro/10/10.9.md

# KI: "On macOS it is not possible to exclude documents": SPX-3306
# KI: "When the `com.mendix.storage.azure.BlobEndpoint`": RUN-3930
---

## 10.9.0 {#1090}

**Release date: March 26, 2024**

{{% button color="info" href="https://marketplace.mendix.com/link/studiopro/10.9.0" text="Go to Marketplace" title="Download version 10.9.0 from the Marketplace" %}}

### New Features

#### X-Ray Mode (beta)

We are adding an experimental feature to make working in Design Mode easier: X-Ray Mode. This feature adds a special border to certain widgets, such as Layout Grids and Contaienrs, and their sizes change. This should make it easier to visualize the structure of your page.

When the X-Ray Mode experimental feature is enabled, the X-Ray Mode itself can be toggled on or off with a button the topbar, next to the button to toggle conditional visibility. Turning X-Ray Mode off returns the page to the WYSIWYG editor experience of Design Mode.

As Structure Mode is not supported on Mac, we are enabling the X-Ray Mode feature on Mac by default. On Windows, it can also be enabled in the `New features` section of the settings. You can opt out of the beta by disabling the feature in the settings.

> 

Reviewer: @MariaShaposhnikova we need to add one release note that was not ready when the freeze started (while the code is in there). Can you please add the following:

```
#### WebSQL replacement

We introduced an alternative for WebSQL with this release. After upgrading to this release, opening your offline PWA in your browsers will automatically upgrade your WebSQL database to a new SQLite-based database. For this to function correctly, the browser must run in a Secure Context, which means either an HTTPS connection or by accessing your offline PWA via localhost. All functionality will remain functioning as is.
```

Thanks!

Author: @arjenw , thank you, added!

# KI: "When the `com.mendix.storage.azure.BlobEndpoint`": RUN-3930
---

## 10.9.0 {#1090}

**Release date: March 26, 2024**

{{% button color="info" href="https://marketplace.mendix.com/link/studiopro/10.9.0" text="Go to Marketplace" title="Download version 10.9.0 from the Marketplace" %}}

### New Features

#### X-Ray Mode (Beta)

We are adding an experimental feature to **Design mode**: X-Ray mode. X-Ray mode allows you to see certain structural elements of your page while still in Design mode. Specifically, this feature adds a special border to certain widgets, such as layout grids and containers. You can also change their sizes. 

When the X-Ray Mode experimental feature is enabled, the X-Ray Mode itself can be toggled on or off with a button on the top bar. Turning X-Ray Mode off returns the page to the WYS/WYG editor of **Design mode**.

As **Structure mode** is not supported on Mac, we are enabling X-Ray Mode on Mac by default. 

On Windows, X-Ray Mode can also be enabled in the **New features** section of **Preferences**. You can opt out of the beta by disabling the feature in **Preferences**. {TW}

#### Session and Login Token Improvements

> We introduced authentication token support for web applications, allowing users to stay logged in until their token expires. Developers can now use the new core client API, login2, with the useAuthToken argument, which allows them to specify whether to generate an authentication token for long-lived sessions.
> 
> Both web and native applications now deliver a consistent long-lived session experience, while maintaining backward compatibility for existing applications.
> The key change is the introduction of the useAuthToken HttpOnly cookie, which controls token generation and adds an HttpOnly cookie for the authtoken. As a result, native applications have switched to use the authtoken cookie to hold the token instead of storing it.
> 
> Token expiry is now controlled by the com.mendix.webui.HybridAppLoginTimeOut runtime setting, with a default expiration set to one year if left unspecified. {TW}

Reviewer 2: I think there is too much information here. It would be better to direct users to the new *Session Management* doc.
I suggest something like:

```suggestion
We introduced authentication token support for applications, allowing users to stay logged in until their token expires. 

Offline-first apps will use authentication tokens by default, providing compatibility with long-lived sessions in previous Mendix versions.

You can also use the new core client API, `login2`, with the useAuthToken argument, which allows you to specify whether to generate an authentication token for long-lived sessions. This can be used for both online and offline-first apps.

See [Session Management](/runtime/session-management) for more information on how this works.
```

#### Other New Features

- We added a **Continue All** button to the debugger. When there are multiple paused microflows, nanoflows, or rules, then they can all be continued by pressing a single button instead of having to continue them individually. {TW}
- You can now indicate that a constant value is private (rather than shared). Studio Pro will store encrypted value in the user settings (rather than in the app model).

### Improvements

> - We improved the XPath constraint Builder to format the XPath whenever a change is made.
> - We improved the feedback shown to the user in the XPath constraint Builder when unsupported association or attribute references are used in the XPath expression editor.
> - We improved the feedback shown to the user in the XPath constraint Builder when advanced token expressions are used in the XPath expression editor.
> - We improved the order of the drop-down list items in the XPath constraint Builder to better match the autocomplete list in the XPath expression editor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* We improved the XPath constraint Visual Builder in a number of ways:
    * it now formats the XPath whenever a change is made.
    * it provides better feedback when unsupported association or attribute references are used in the XPath expression editor.
    * it provides better feedback when advanced token expressions are used in the XPath expression editor.
    * the order of the drop-down list items matches the autocomplete list in the XPath expression editor more closely.
```

- We fixed a bug related to the published REST-Services not specifying the wrong method in case of a 405 response.
We fixed an issue in the microflow, nanoflow and rule editors where some combination of splits, merges, and events could be connected incorrectly when dragged onto a flow
- We reintroduced dropping documents from the App Explorer onto related actions in the logic editors. 
    - For example, now dropping a microflow onto a Call microflow action will change that action's target to the dropped microflow.
- We now render the Task Queue icon on Microflow call actions and JavaAction call actions when they are executed in a task queue.
- We fixed an issue that prevented the display of the icon for "commit actions with event handlers" in the logic editors.
- In the logic editors, we re-added the initialized and changed attribute names to the default captions of CreateObject and ChangeObject actions.
- We fixed an issue where double-clicking on a newly added microflow object opened the microflow properties dialog.
- We fixed invalid placement of a moved object in a loop when moving the object causes the loop to resize in the logic editors.

> - We improved Studio Pro general performance. Simple object moves no longer trigger consistency checks in the logic editors.

Reviewer 3: Hi @MariaShaposhnikova,

I've adjusted the text of this note via a request from Arjan:

> - We improved Studio Pro general performance. Simple object moves no longer trigger consistency checks in the logic editors.

We would like to also move this note into the **Improvements** section and put it together with other performance-related notes (if there are any). I see that you probably are still restructuring all the notes, so I am not moving it atm. Can you please do that during your restructuring process? Thanks!

- We fixed the problem that anonymous user objects were kept in the database when their associated anonymous sessions were deleted on application startup after a model update.
- We fixed an issue where dependency synchronization would fail with a CE9803 error when Gradle could not choose between different version variants (for example: guava:##.##.##-jre/guava:##.##.##-android) for certain libraries. We added a Gradle core plugin (jvm-ecosystem) to the buildscript to resolve this issue. (Ticket #206976)
- We restored the original functionality in Azure file storage, where container name can be specified in `com.mendix.storage.azure.BlobEndpoint` runtime setting. (Ticket 210679)
- We fixed an issue where, if the call microflow activity of the sub-workflow fails, the parent workflow still remained in progress. The parent workflow will now fail when any activity in a sub-workflow fails.

> 

Reviewer 4: Hi @MariaShaposhnikova , we need if possible to add one release note that couldn't make it to the release notes

`- We have removed react-native-code-push dependency. We recommend migrating to Mendix OTA instead.
 - We fixed an issue where download file was not working on Android if the files encryption is enabled. (Tickets 204783,  211451  and 204891)`

Author: @Ahmad-Elsayed , thank you, I will add it.

### Known Issues

* Line endings in CSS files are not being handled properly, so when using [Revert All Changes](/refguide/using-version-control-in-studio-pro/) or performing other version-control operations, CSS files appear in the [Changes on Disk](/refguide/version-control-menu/#show-changes) dialog box.
    * Workaround: For details, see [this section](/refguide/troubleshoot-version-control-issues/#css-error) in *Troubleshooting Version Control*.
* For some activities in the logic editors, the types of variables are not visible or shown as **Not set**. This is only a visual bug. (Tickets 205751, 207251)
* A finished parallel split path that is removed from a running workflow instance wrongly leads to a versioning conflict. Please note that "path" was called "branch" in earlier versions.

> * On macOS it is not possible to exclude documents, and in the **App Explorer** not all context actions on selections work properly.

Reviewer 5: Hi @MariaShaposhnikova, this issue has been addressed in Studio Pro 10.9.0

Author: @ievgen-baida , thanks for the update!
